Update: Config File Improvements (#13)
eslint/rfcs: designs/2019-eslintrc-improvements/README.md

- Start Date: 2019-02-25
- RFC PR: (leave this empty, to be filled in later)
- Authors: (the names of everyone contributing to this RFC)

# Config File Improvements

## Summary

> This proposal improves the internal logic of configuration files to maintain our codebase easier and add enhancements easier. This is a change of architecture and large refactoring.

Reviewer: It seems like this RFC has a lot of refactoring, and also some user-facing effects. Could you summarize what the main user-facing effects are?

From reading through quickly, I saw the following changes, but I might have missed some:

* Updates the `files` option to determine the set of files that get linted
* Allows `extends` to be used in `overrides`
* Loads plugins relative to config files, rather than the CWD? (This might have been caused by confusion from https://github.com/eslint/rfcs/pull/14#issuecomment-466882086.)
* Fixes a bug in `overrides`/`extends` resolution order
* Loads parsers lazily

Author: I will update the summary. I'm sorry.

Author: I updated it.

1. It simplifies the internal structure of configuration files by an array.
1. The config object owns loaded plugins and parsers rather than registers those to somewhere.
1. It changes the processing order to "config-then-files" from "files-then-config".
1. It restructures the files about CLIEngine and lookup.

And some side-effects are:

- `overrides` supports `extends` and nested `overrides`.
- A surprised behavior about `overrides` is fixed.
- Unused parser settings no longer throw ([eslint/eslint#11396]).

### 1. It simplifies the internal structure of configuration files by an array.

When it reads configuration files, it flattens the `extends` property and `overrides` property of the configuration. This is the following order:

1. The loaded configurations of `extends` property.
1. The configuration except `extends` property and `overrides` property.
1. The configurations of `overrides` property.

If it cannot load a configuration of `extends` property, it throws an error immediately.

If a loaded configuration of `extends` property has `extends` property or `overrides` property, it flattens those recursively.

> If a configuration of `overrides` property has `extends` property or `overrides` property, it flattens those recursively. The `files` property and `excludedFiles` property of the configuration are applied to every flattended item. If a flattened item has own `files` property and `excludedFiles` property, it composes those by logical AND.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a configuration of `overrides` property has `extends` property or `overrides` property, it flattens those recursively. The `files` property and `excludedFiles` property of the configuration are applied to every flattened item. If a flattened item has own `files` property and `excludedFiles` property, it composes those by logical AND.
```

> About duplicated setting item, a posterior element in the array priors to an anterior element in the array.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For duplicated settings, a later element in the array has precedence over an earlier element in the array.
```

### 4. It restructures the files about CLIEngine and lookup.

It's premature optimization if we moved a logic only one functionality is using to the shared utility directory. The shared utility directory is similar to global variables, so it makes hard to know who use the utilities.

This proposal moves some utility files to the directory of lookup functionality.

We should be able to understand the lookup logic only the files in [lib/lookup](https://github.com/eslint/eslint/tree/proof-of-concept/config-array-in-eslintrc/lib/_lookup).

## Documentation

There are no changes because this is refactoring.

## Drawbacks

This is a large change. Currently we have multiple pull requests around configuration files, this will conflict with those pull requests severely. And this will be a large change for tests. Our tests really depend on internal structures seriously.

## Backwards Compatibility Analysis

Most cases work fine as is.
But I guess there are some breaking changes.

### ✅ CLIEngine#addPlugin

It can work fine as is.

> `CLIEngine` has a `Map<string, Plugin>` for the added plugin, and it gives `FileEnumerator` (then `ConfigArrayFactory.load*` methods) the map, and the loading logic uses the map to load plugins.

Reviewer: It's not necessary for this proposal, but in the long term I think it would be nice to:

* Make `CLIEngine` immutable (e.g. by adding a `plugins` argument to the constructor, and removing `addPlugin`)
* Make `Linter` immutable (e.g. by adding a `rules` argument to the constructor, and removing `defineRule`)

It seems like both methods probably only have a small number of users, but removing them would simplify a lot of implementation.

### ✅ Linter

It can work fine as is.

> Only if a given `config` has `extractConfig` method, `Linter` does the setup process for the config. Otherwise, it works the same as currently.

Reviewer: Could `extractConfig` be handled before calling `Linter#verify`? It seems like it could be better for `Linter#verify` to only use the extracted config. (For example, the `filename` argument is optional in `Linter`, but `extractConfig` requires a filename.)

Author: I considering about #3. The code can have several file names, I thought giving `ConfigArray` is useful.

Reviewer: I see, thanks for explaining. I had forgotten about #3.

At the moment, #3 handles processors in `CLIEngine`, and repeatedly invokes `Linter` with a new filepath and config. With this proposal, would processors be handled in `Linter` instead?

Author: Yes. I will add some notes.

In this RFC, because `ConfigArray` has complete information, we don't need the file system to get the configuration of each virtual file. Instead, we can get it with `ConfigArray#extractConfig(filePath)` method. Therefore, we don't need to clone `Linter#verifyAndFix` logic to implement #3.

### ⚠️ It looks plugins up from the location where the config file is.

This means we get the consistent way to load dependencies on `extends`, `parser`, and `plugins`.

Currently, ESLint looks shareable configs and parsers relatively from the location where the config file is. But ESLint looks plugins from the project root. This is forcing inconvenient to shareable config maintainers ([eslint/eslint#3458], [eslint/eslint#10643]).

This proposal makes those behaviors consistent.

Each element of `ConfigArray` has the loaded plugins. When ESLint merges those by `ConfigArray#extractConfig(filePath)`, if one same plugin loaded from different config files (except self-loading), it throws a confliction error because of https://gist.github.com/not-an-aardvark/169bede8072c31a500e018ed7d6a8915.

This behavior is described on [#14] as well. This change has huge impact, probably we should discuss on [#14] individually.

People can resolve this problem with `.eslintrc.js` and to install needed plugins:

```js
const foo = require("eslint-config-foo")
const bar = require("eslint-config-bar")

module.exports = {
    overrides: [
        Object.assign({ files: "*.js" }, foo),

>         Object.assign({ files: "*.js" }, bar),

Reviewer: I don't think this would work in general because if `eslint-config-foo` contains `extends` clauses, they are only valid when resolved relative to the location of `eslint-config-foo`. (This is a disadvantage of using strings with `extends`.)

Maybe we could provide a utility function that rewrites all paths in a config to absolute paths.

Author: I got it.

I'm considering either of two options.

1. Provides a utility to rewrite relative paths to absolute paths.
2. Allows the same plugins between a config file and extended configs.
